This is Sunday, the 21st of May. Just now pulling
out of the driveway of the house, heading toward
Kerrville for a meeting of the Shriner Board,
hoping to do some more recollecting
of years at A&M.
Since I'm not positive where I quit with the
previous
tapes, I apologize in advance for any repetition
that may occur. Now I'm going to stop and see if this
machine is working.
First, a little more of a retrospective of Mr.
Rutter.
Since we did not know of his
decline in physical health, almost none of us had
paused to
stop and evaluate all that he had accomplished and
all that he had meant to the institution. In
addition to the fact that he was not vulnerable to
allegations of not being a Texan or an Aggie or not
having been in the Corps or anything like this,
it seldom occurred to any of us that another
advantage he possessed
was the fact that without the
years of graduate study,
master's thesis, doctoral dissertation, term
papers, and all that the rest of us possessed, He
was able to see to the heart of things perhaps more
clearly
than
most academic eggheads would have been able to
view.
He was a true leader, able to make decisions
rather clearly and certainly he stood strongly
for everything in which he had a belief and
confidence.
I'm convinced that his initial
hesitation dash and possibly even opposition,
Dash,
to the traumatic changes of the early 60s,
coeducation,
voluntary Corps of Cadets, racial integration,
and
general... academic changes including
admission requirements
plus curriculum breadth and depth.
That
his hesitancy
on those came from his concern over whether or not
he could succeed in that campaign.
Thus the former field commander as he looked at the
battle plan at first
it now seems that he
delayed the attack until he was
more positive about the probability of victory
for his campaign.
He tended to be a
leader
who
would personally go to the academic front line,
whether it be
to Washington, Austin,
an A&M board meeting,
session with deans or faculty or a march by the
students on his house, he would be there
personally to make very clear,
usually, that he had made the decision and would
stand behind it. Paragraph, a number of us heard
him
identify himself as the Potbellied Prexy
which was in part
his way of claiming links to A&M's traditions
because in his day the chief executive office, the
president, as the chief executive officer was
known in the Corps as the Prexy. In addition, that
physical identification
was his way of saying, most often with a smile,
that he wasn't vain,
nor did he spend much time worrying about whether
or not he was clothed
in the latest style.
He was in fact
ready to do his best
and would take the responsibility
for such a venture.
But then he was gone.
The arrival of Dr. Williams
brought some change in style.
He was far more outgoing and
was a very skilled speaker.
In those speeches,
it seemed to a casual observer that he was almost
speaking extemporaneously.
Now it is obvious that his remarks were carefully
planned.
He had a very private reservoir
file of notes, anecdotes, jokes, et cetera,
most of which he could deliver flawlessly.
He seemed particularly able to speak at the level
of his audience,
whether it be
Aggie undergraduates,
A&M Mothers Clubs,
legislators,
and was particularly skillful at a general
meeting of the general faculty.
There he caused almost all of us to walk away
saying, this is the man we've been waiting for.
Paragraph once more, his experience at Clemson.
which was far more similar in its background
experience to A&M than we realized at the time,
helped him to understand
very, very well
how to relate to such audiences.
Occasionally, some of us could remember hearing
a Williams story for a second time. For example,
the classic account of the man trying
to raise the load of bricks in a pulley system, in
which he himself finally got involved, in which
the lifter finally got involved, was himself
lifted, then dropped, only to be hit on the head by
the bricks.
But he was the right man for the time,
Similarly, Mrs. Williams, having been a faculty
wife,
like being part of an academic couple, like so many
of us who had gone through the realities of student
housing, in their years at Emory,
then renting an apartment at Clemson, and finally
moving to what was for them a very special dream
house in
a pleasant, quiet, curving, wooded street,
timbered street not far from the campus.
Dr. Williams, Dr. and Mrs. Williams had two
daughters, thus they were sensitive to the needs
of coeds.
Their older daughter, being a college student
when they arrived, and their younger during
graduation at A&M Consolidated High School.
Mrs. Williams
instantly became very much involved in a broad
array of campus activities
and seemed more outgoing
as a campus first lady than Mrs. Rudder.
And one of the reasons for that perhaps was because
the Rudder children were younger
when that administration began in 1959. And
with four youngsters, Mrs. Rudder
Had more home duties.
Also, she said to many individuals. That she
understood from quote from Earl. Let my. Task is to
raise the children and keep house.
Period quote.
Many of us assumed, however, that both ladies,
Mrs. Rudder and Mrs. Williams,
were quietly influential in their husbands'
policies and roles. Paragraph.
On the first occasion
in which my wife and I visited the new president's
home, as we then called it,
near the south edge of the campus,
I quickly
expressed deep impressions with the home's size,
beauty,
and style.
Instantly, Mrs. Williams replied by saying, I
don't know where you live or what it looks like, but
I will swap houses with you
instantly
with no extra payment.
When I asked her why she felt that way,
she pointed out that this was, quote, not my house,
period, quote, a comma, quote, and that whatever
arrangement she made of furnishings and
something else or anything else that someone
offered a comment about how the house had been
arranged before the Williams arrived.
Later as campus CEO,
later when I became a campus CEO in El Paso and
Columbia, Missouri, My wife and I became far more
sensitive to the realities of such changes.
The Williamses
had many groups over to the president's home.
And they were always particularly proud that the
first group that came the night they moved in was
the Aggie Corps of Cadets led by the A&M band to
welcome them
with appropriate quote maroon sounding quote
tunes to ensure that they knew they were very
deeply appreciated at their new home.
Now this is a note to the typist. I think I have
already dictated a bit about the first
conversation with Dr. Williams after he got here.
and also Dr. Calhoun asking me to come over and join
him. Now I want to jump back and talk about teaching
at A&M, and we will have to insert this earlier at
some point in the tapes chronologically.
Teaching has always been, for me,
by far the most satisfying part of academic
service.
in using the word quote teaching quote
I am including not only the instruction in formal
classes
but the countless other opportunities for
student contact
and always in an office conversation,
service on committees and other advisory groups
with students, DASH, or any other opportunity for
student contact.
paragraph in my opinion
teaching is a calling
and somehow that idea came into my heart when I and
others used to get frustrated at Austin College
when we would hear some speaker particularly at
compulsory chapel services on Tuesday and
Thursday mornings at 10 o'clock
talked to us about, quote, full-time Christian
service, quote, dash, which those speakers
usually
limited to the ordained clergy
This observer,
hopefully using
what is consistent with the Calvinist beliefs
that have run in the family for many generations,
is convinced
that every individual
may be called to, quote, full-time Christian
service, quote, dash,
in a truly broad variety of professional tasks.
My inspirations, some of which were realized at
the time and some certainly were not,
were Faced Range from the third grade, Grace Glaze
from the fourth,
Myrtmae Force from junior high,
and
then Mr. Sidner from Austin College,
Elmer Flaccus,
and a number of people at Rice.
I never had a formal course from Frank Vandiver,
but I certainly have always felt marked by his
splendid
and sometimes incredible ability to retain,
organize, and share factual information in a
meaningful manner. Another Rice faculty member
who was important in my teaching development was
Ed Phillips,
who one day asked me for advice about whether or not
he should accept an Austin College appointment,
and I proudly and happily encouraged him to accept
it.
He served there for three decades or more and now
has been elected an honorary member of one of the
rice classes back in the 50s.
Paragraph. The sum of all of those the influence
from all of those teachers and many others
caused me to believe that
teaching history at the university level
should have as its focus
an understanding of how this great nation came to
be what it is and to try to present that information
in such a fashion
that we might even dream
of greater progress in the future.
But while
looking forward, be well aware
of the reality that this nation is the world's
pacemaker
in so many positive ways.
Paragraph.
Every semester, from the fall of 1959 until
our departure from Missouri
following the spring semester in 1997, I taught at
least one big survey section in US history.
The first years at A&M There were four sections
per semester. Most of them were History 105,
taking the study of the U.S. up through the Civil
War. But some were History 106, the second
semester, for the more recent period.
In those courses,
I used a lecture outline,
which I normally would write on the blackboard
prior to the beginning of a lecture.
That meant that I always tried to get to class 10 to
15 minutes before the beginning of that session
and put the key points of that lecture on the board.
In addition, I tried to be particularly careful
about names of places, individuals, battles,
acts of legislation, et cetera,
that the members of the class might not quickly
recognize some sound
and or might not be able to spell correctly
as we proceeded
as the first day of the of the class arrived,
I tried to pass out as quickly as possible a
three or four page
quote syllabus.